0 
 
  
1 
 
11 Key Messages 
1. Ask and document smoking status for all patients. 
2. Provide brief advice on quit smoking at every visit to all smokers. 
3. Use individual, group and telephone counselling approaches, or in 
combination for smoking cessation interventions. 
4. Assess level of nicotine addiction using Modified Fagerström Test for 
Cigarette Dependence Questionnaire and verify smoking status  using 
carbon monoxide (CO) breath analyser.  
5. Offer pharmacotherapy to all smokers who are attempting to quit, unless 
contraindicated. 
6. If selected,  use NRT for at least eight to twelve weeks, whereas 
varenicline should be used for at least twelve weeks.  
7. Combination therapy (e.g., two NRTs, a non-NRT, e.g. bupropion with 
a NRT) is better than monotherapy in smoking cessation treatment and 
may be most useful for those smokers at highest risk of relapse. 
8. Use smoking cessation medications with caution in special populations 
(e.g., children and adolescents, pregnant, breastfeeding women, 
psychiatric and substance abuse disorder patients). 
9. Arrange a minimum of six to eight face to face follow-up sessions for 
smoking cessation interventions in six months. 
10. Apply motivational intervention technique (incorporating 5R’s approach 
– Relevance, Risks, Rewards, Roadblocks & Repetition) for patients who 
are unwilling to make a quit attempt. 
11. Provide effective relapse prevention interventions to all smokers who 
have recently quit. 
 
PUBLISHED BY 
Tobacco Control Unit & FCTC Secretariat, 
Non-Communicable Disease Section,  
Disease Control Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Federal Government Administrative Centre, Putrajaya, Malaysia 
This Quick Reference Guide provides key messages and summary of the main 
recommendations in the Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) on Treatment of Tobacco Use 
Disorder. 
 
Details of the evidence supporting these recommendations can be found in the above CPG, 
available on the following websites: www.moh.gov.my and www.acadmed.org.my 
2 
 
ALGORITHM FOR TREATMENT OF TOBACCO USE DISORDER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MODIFIED FAGERSTRÖM TEST FOR CIGARETTE DEPENDENCE QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
No Question Option Point 
1 
How soon after you wake up do you smoke your first 
cigarette? 
 
 Within 5 minutes   
 5 to 30 minutes   
 31 to 60 minutes    
 After 60 minutes   
 3 
 2 
 1 
 0 
2 
Do you find it difficult not to smoke in places where 
you shouldn’t, such as in church or school, in a 
movie, at the library, on a bus, in court or in a 
hospital? 
 Yes  
 No 
 1 
 0 
3 Which cigarette would you most hate to give up; 
which cigarette do you treasure the most? 
 The first one in the 
morning  
 Any other one 
 1 
 0 
4 How many cigarettes do you smoke each day? 
 10 or fewer   
 11 to 20   
 21 to 30   
 31 or more   
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
5 Do you smoke more during the first few hours after 
waking up than during the rest of the day? 
 Yes  
 No 
 1 
 0 
6 
Do you still smoke if you are so sick that you are in 
bed most of the day, or if you have a cold or the flu 
and have trouble breathing? 
 Yes  
 No 
 1 
 0 
Scoring: 7 to 10 points = highly dependent; 4 to 6 points = moderately dependent; less than 4 points 
=minimally dependent. 
 
3 
 
5A’S STRATEGY FOR BRIEF INTERVENTION 
 
ASK 
Identify and document tobacco use status for every patient at every visit, 
including the adolescents. 
Where appropriate, ask the caretaker of the patient about tobacco use or 
exposure to tobacco smoke. 
ADVISE 
Advise in a clear, strong and personalized manner urge every tobacco user 
to quit. 
ASSESS 
Is the tobacco user willing to make a quit attempt at this time? 
If the patient clearly states he or she is unwilling to make a quit attempt at 
this time, provide a motivational interven tion built around the “5 R’s”: 
Relevance, Risks, Rewards, Roadblocks, and Repetition. 
ASSIST 
Assist in quit attempt for patients who are willing to make a quit attempt, 
use counselling with pharmacotherapy (when indicated) to help him or her 
quit. 
Apply STAR method in preparations for quitting (see below).  
ARRANGE 
Follow-up should occur soon after the quit date, preferably during the first 
week. Subsequent follow -ups are recommended weekly within the first 
month, and then every two weeks for the 2nd and 3rd month, and monthly 
after that up to 6 months. 
 
 
STAR METHOD FOR PATIENT’S PREPARATIONS TO QUIT  
Set Set a quit date. Ideally, the quit date should be within 2 weeks.  
Tell 
Tell family, friends, and co -workers about quitting and request 
understanding and support. Also, help patient obtain extra-treatment social 
support from self-help groups, if available.  
Anticipate 
Anticipate challenges to planned quit attempt, particularly during the critical 
first few weeks, including  nicotine withdrawal symptoms. Discuss 
challenges/triggers and how to overcome them.  
Remove 
Remove tobacco products from the environment. Prior to quitting, avoid 
smoking in places where most of the time is spent (e.g., work, home, car). 
4 
 
 5R’S APPROACH FOR PATIENTS WHO ARE UNWILLING TO QUIT 
Relevance Encourage the patient to indicate why quitting is personally relevant, 
being as specific as possible. 
Risks Ask the patient to identify potential negative consequences of tobacco 
use. 
Rewards Ask the patient to identify potential benefits of stopping tobacco use. 
Roadblocks Ask the patient to identify barriers or impediments to quitting and 
provide treatment that could address barriers. 
Repetition Repeat motivational intervention every time an unmotivated patient 
visits the clinic setting. 
 
 
MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING STRATEGIES 
Express 
empathy 
• Use open-ended questions to explore the importance of addressing 
tobacco smoking, concerns and benefits of quitting. 
• Use reflective listening to seek shared understanding 
• Normalize feelings and concerns  
• Support the patient’s autonomy a nd right to choose or reject 
change.  
Develop 
discrepancy 
• Highlight the discrepancy between the patient’s present behaviour 
and expressed priorities, values, and goals. 
• Reinforce and support “change talk” and “commitment” language. 
• Build and deepen commitment to change.  
Roll with 
resistance 
• Back off and use reflection when the patient expresses resistance. 
• Express empathy. 
• Ask permission to provide information. 
Support 
self-efficacy 
• Help the patient to identify and build on past successes. 
• Offer options for achievable small steps toward change. 
5 
 
PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTION - NICOTINE BASED SMOKING CESSATION DRUGS 
Drug Dosage  Prescribing instructions Precautions Side effects. 
Nicotine Gum 2 mg and 4 mg per piece.  
 
2 mg gum for patients smoking < 20 
cigs/day, 4 mg gum for ≥ 20 
cigs/day. 
 
Use up to 12 weeks with no more 
than 24 pieces/day.  
Chewing technique: chew slowly until a 
peppery or minty taste emerges, then 
parked between cheek and gum. 
Repeat for about 30 minutes then 
discard 
 
Chew the gum on a fixed schedule (at 
least one piece every 1-2 hours during 
waking hours) for at least 1-3 months. 
 
Do not eat or drink while gum is in the 
mouth. 
 
Pregnancy and lactating women: 
Should be used only if the 
increased likelihood of smoking 
abstinence, with its potential 
benefits,   outweighs   the   risk   
of   nicotine   replacement   and   
potential concomitant smoking.   
 
Cardiovascular diseases: should 
be used  with  caution  among  
those in the immediate (within 1 
to 2 weeks) post myocardial 
infarction period, serious 
arrhythmias and worsening 
angina pectoris. 
Mouth soreness, hiccups, 
dyspepsia, and jaw ache. 
Nicotine Patch Niquitin® : 21, 14 and 7 mg 
 
Nicorette® : 25,15 and 10 mg 
Apply a new patch on a relatively 
hairless location (e.g., upper arm or 
shoulder) as soon as the patient wakes 
up.  
 
Smokers with time-to-first cigarette 
(TTFC) of 30 minutes or less may 
benefit from putting the patch 
immediately before sleeping. 
 
Remove the patch after 16 or 24 hours. 
 
Rotate and avoid using the same site of 
application for ~ 1 week. 
Skin reactions, insomnia. 
Nicotine Lozenge 2 mg and 4 mg 
 
2 mg for patients smoking < 20 
cigs/day, 4 mg for ≥ 20 cigs/day. 
 
Week 1-6: 1 lozenge 1-2 hourly. Min: 9 
lozenge/day. Week 7-9: 1 lozenge 2-4 
hourly. Week 10-12: 1 lozenge 4-8 
hourly. Max: 15 lozenge/day. Max 
duration: 24 wk.  
 
Should not be chewed or swallowed. 
Do not eat or drink while lozenge is in 
the mouth. 
Nausea, vomiting, 
dyspepsia, hiccups, 
flatulence, oral discomfort. 
6 
 
PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTION - NON-NICOTINE BASED SMOKING CESSATION DRUGS 
Drug Dosage  Prescribing instructions Precautions Side effects. 
Varenicline Days 1-3: 0.5 mg once daily; Days 
4-7: 0.5 mg twice daily;  
 
Day 8-end of treatment: 1 mg 
twice daily.  
 
Minimum treatment  duration is 12 
weeks. 
 
Start 1-2 weeks before quit date.  
Best taken with a bit of food. 
 
 
Renal i nsufficiency , and 
lactating women.  
 
Not recommended  in 
pregnancy , children  and 
adolescents.  
Nausea, headache, 
insomnia and abnormal 
dreams. 
Bupropion Begin 1-2 weeks prior to quit date 
with 150 mg o.m. for 3 days, then 
increase to 150 mg b.i.d. for 12 
weeks following the quit date.  
 
 
If insomnia is marked, take the PM 
dose earlier (in the afternoon, at least 8 
hours after the first dose) may provide 
some relief. 
Pregnancy and lactating women 
 
Close monitoring of patients for 
clinical worsening, emergence of 
suicidality, agitation, irritability & 
unusual changes in behaviour.  
Excessive use or abrupt 
discontinuation of alcohol or 
sedatives. Renal or hepatic 
impairment including mild to 
moderate & severe liver 
cirrhosis. Patients w/ a recent 
history of MI or unstable heart 
disease.  
 
Contraindicated in individuals 
with a history of seizure 
disorder, a history of an eating 
disorder, who are using another 
form of bupropion (Wellbutrin 
SR) or who have used an MAO 
inhibitor in the past 14 days. 
 
 
Insomnia, headache and 
dry mouth. 
7 
 
CORRECT WAY TO USE THE GUM  
 
 
   CHEW 
Chew the gum slowly until peppery/minty taste becomes 
strong after about 10 chews 
  
 
 
 
   REST 
Rest the gum between your gum and cheek 
      
          
 
    
  
CHEW 
Start chewing again when taste has faded 
 
 
 
After about 30 minutes discard it properly 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
